[Music]
three mission to Florida
spy fever remained rampant in America as
Napoleon Bonaparte emerged from the
political turmoil in France as a new
unifying force on the continent the
ambitions of the new French regime soon
became apparent to President Jefferson
the Treaty of Fontainebleau 1762 ceded
the Louisiana territory to Spain but the
secret Treaty of San Ildefonso 1800
returned the province to France at the
behest of Napoleon who projected the
revival of a colonial empire in North
America the Treaty of Madrid 1801
confirmed the retrocession
and shortly thereafter the matter came
to Jefferson's attention prompting him
to begin efforts for the purchase of new
orleans and west florida the result of
these actions was the acquisition of the
entire louisiana area and a heightened
sensitivity to the intrigues of
Bonaparte the French were not the only
threat to the security and sovereignty
of the infant United States at this time
the phobias about spies and espionage
within America were kindled anew with
the disclosure of the so called burr
conspiracy shortly after the duel in
which Alexander Hamilton was fatally
wounded July 11 1804 Aaron Burr began
his efforts at organizing a movement for
separating the western territories of
the Mississippi region from the United
States after being refused financial
assistance for his cause by the British
bura obtained a small sum from the
Spanish and began focusing upon lands of
the southwest and Mexico for
establishing a Western Empire it is
still unclear if his intent was
treasonable or merely a filibustering
expedition against his benefactors in
the Spanish dominions nevertheless burr
is known to have made a tour of the
Mississippi River Valley May through
September 1805 and to have conferred
with General James Wilkinson commander
of the armed forces in that region at
the end of August 1806 he stayed at
Blennerhassett
island on the Ohio River where he
recruited some 60 to 80 men and ten
boats in the meantime Wilkinson warned
Jefferson of burrs activities and the
President issued a proclamation on
November 27th 1806 warning citizens
against participating in an illegal
expedition against Spanish territory
unaware of this declaration Burr and his
company began their journey down the
Mississippi passing several American
forts without interference when they
came within 30 miles of Natchez burr
learned that Wilkinson had betrayed him
and he fled toward Spanish Florida but
was captured and arrested in Alabama
indicted for treason burrs trial before
Chief Justice Marshall presiding over
the US Circuit Court ended in an
acquittal burr went into European exile
to escape further prosecutions for
murder in New York and New Jersey in the
case of his duel with Hamilton and for
treason in Ohio Kentucky Mississippi and
Louisiana in spite of the confusion
about the exact nature of burrs
expedition popular sentiments against
France and Spain remained fixed the
Louisiana Purchase of 1803 left the
status of Spanish ruled East and West
Florida unsettled Jefferson supported
the view that Louisiana included the
portion of Florida between the
Mississippi River to the west and the
perdido River to the east the most
southern portions of the current states
of Alabama and Mississippi in 1810 a
group of expansionists led a revolt in
the Spanish dominion captured the
fortifications at Baton Rouge and
proclaimed the independent republic of
West Florida on October 27th a month
after its liberation the Republic was
proclaimed a US possession and it's
military occupation as part of the
Orleans Territory was authorized
there were also designs on West Florida
which Congress ultimately incorporated
into the Mississippi Territory on May
14th 1812 and scattered outbursts of
opposition to Spanish authority within
the Florida peninsula into this
situation President Madison dispatched
George Matthews as a political emissary
and intelligence agent
ordered to proceed secretly to Florida
Matthews was to present himself to the
Spanish authorities as an American
Commissioner authorized to accept such
territory as might be turned over to the
United States by Spain quote the
Peninsular war was then cauterizing
Spain and the colonial office in Madrid
had neither funds nor power a new war
between Britain and the United States
was foreseen in 1811 and President
Madison believed that the English would
probably seize Florida as a base of
operations to prevent this he appointed
Matthews and Colonel John McKee an
Indian agent to negotiate with the
Spanish governor and secure if possible
a session of the provinces they were to
fix a date for their return if desired
in case the commissioners were
successful a provisional government was
to be established but if unsuccessful it
was understood from the beginning that
forcible possession was to be taken
should there be any reason to suppose a
foreign power was moving to capture the
Florida's Maquis seems to have abandoned
this enterprise leaving Matthews to
carry on alone which was very much to
the gentleman's taste he was a native of
Ireland had fought in the Revolutionary
War and had risen to the rank of general
no celebrated exploit of that struggle
is connected with his name but he was
described as a man of unsurpassed
bravery and indomitable energy strong
minded but almost illiterate moving to
Georgia in 1785 his indomitable energy
won him election as governor of the very
next year in 1794 and 1795 he was again
elected governor of the state and
sometime thereafter though entitled to
be called both honorable and general he
did not disdain to work for the War
Department as a special agent on the
Florida frontier end quote
as an agent provocateur Matthews took it
upon himself to recruit former Americans
residing in Spanish Florida to revolt
against their foreign ruler when the
colonial governor indicated opposition
to these activities Matthews returned to
Georgia where he gathered a private army
of sharpshooting frontiersman and Indian
fighters and once again entered the
Spanish territory on a mission of
espionage quote a number of Georgian
frontiersman preparing for a descent
upon Florida assembled on the opposite
bank of the st. Marys River uniting with
the border settlers on the Spanish side
they proceeded to organize an
independent Republic of Florida with
Colonel John McIntosh as president and a
colonel Ashley has military chief
Fernandina on Amelia Island had become
in 1808 a port of free entry for foreign
vessels on the excuse of protecting
American shipping interests general
Matthews determined to occupy furred
Andina and Amelia Island and to that end
sent nine armed vessels into the harbor
forces of the Republic of Florida he
enlisted in his project and commanded by
Ashley
they approached Fernandina by water and
summoned the Spanish commander Don Jose
Lopez to surrender Lopez was forced to
sign articles of capitulation March 17th
1812 possibly a delicate compliment to
the Irishman Mathews these articles
which added to the political apoplexy of
the Spanish Minister in Washington
provided that Fernandina should remain a
free port but in case of war between
Britain and the United States British
ships could not enter the harbor after
May 1st
1813 end quote in Washington the Spanish
Minister maintained a vehement protest
of Matthews activities even though the
furred Andina settlement constituted
something of a compromise of his
diplomatic position reluctantly
President Madison and Secretary of State
James Monroe announced that Matthews had
misunderstood his instructions quote
Governor Mitchell of Georgia was
appointed to replace him and directed to
a
estrada the Spanish colonial governor in
enforcing order because of his unwanted
versatility Matthews was dismissed but
his successor seems to have been given
instructions no less opaque Mitchell it
is said was to obtain safety for the
Revolutionists in Florida aid them as
much as possible and withdraw troops as
slowly as might seem feasible no better
way of pursuing Matthews Imperial aim
could have been contrived and Mitchell
made so much of his opportunities that
the armed force Matthews had organized
and commanded did not retire from
Florida for fourteen months
then in May 1813 it moved to join the
army of Andrew Jackson who is himself
presently ordered to renew the invasion
and march upon Pensacola only a
congressional outcry checked this
expeditionary thrust and Old Hickory
turned aside to the timely defense of
New Orleans
end quote how far astray had Mathews
actually gone in interpreting his
instructions was he isolated from
changing policy developments or the
architect of a self-styled soldier of
fortune escapade quote it was known at
the time that George Matthews reported
regularly to Washington while discussing
the necessity of occupying Florida to
prevent the British from seizing it as a
base the American Congress sat in secret
session and many precautions were taken
to keep the matter from becoming known
Matthews was in no sense there for a
filibuster or private plotter acting
from selfish motives instead he typifies
the land-hungry American frontiersman of
his age who regarded himself as an agent
not a bit secret of divine interposition
and looked upon no boundary of the
United States as final until it vanished
into a sea gulf or ocean Matthews
conduct as a government commissioner was
indefensible and it is easy to
understand why his project carried on by
his successor has no forward place in
the annals of the day a blunt instrument
adding one more note of apology to the
sorry record of events surrounding the
war of 1812 he has to be ignored as he
was formally disowned end quote
and with regard to the evolution and
advancement of the intelligence function
the following conclusion seems
appropriate quote there was very little
Secret Service of a professional mold in
the three-year war of 1812 and not much
effective work of the intelligence on
either side this is surprising for there
were any number of living Americans who
had been officers in the Revolutionary
War and some of them ought to have
remembered General Washington's
profitable dependence upon systematic
espionage and it is all the more
surprising as a fault of the British for
Napoleon was beaten and exiled to Elba
and in 1814 the government in London
could afford to train its heaviest guns
upon the weaker American adversary
footnote Rowan and Deardorff ER page 244
there is evidence that Andrew Jackson
had a secret agent in Pensacola Florida
who is instrumental in informing Jackson
of the size and armament of his
opposition at the Battle of New Orleans
and it is also thought that Jackson had
utilized the services of the notorious
pirate Jean Lafitte for intelligence
purposes but these were very crude and
elementary endeavors pages 244 thru 246
end footnote
[Music]
this is our hidden history
you